---
layout: post
title: "Double Bind"
date: 2020-02-27 09:58:30 +0200
comments: true
categories: 
---

Bateson developed his analytic of the radical disorientation attendant
to "difficulties at the metalevel" while working with patients diagnosed
as schizophrenic in a Palo Alto hospital in the 1950s. This research
project famously led to the double bind hypothesis (Bateson et al. 1972;
Chaney 2017: 45-63). According to this hypothesis, the schizophrenic's
condition originated in one particular, human variant of the (logical)
"paradoxes of abstraction" that pervade and constantly find their way
into "the mental process and communicative habits of mammals" at large
(1972: 180). Such paradoxes arise from condensation and contradiction
within the hierarchy of "levels" or "modes" of communication on which
depends the possibility to know, precisely, "what kind of message a
message is". For a message to be interpreted felicitously, it must me
accompanied by a metamessage --- another, and one degree more abstract,
"class of information" (1979: 115) --- labeling the message as, for
instance, literal, metaphoric, playful, humorous, dead serious,
ritualistic, fiction etc. One ordinary example of paradox of
abstraction, then, would be a message (say, "take me into your arms"),
framed or reframed by a metasignal (the speaker's body stiffens as she
receives the hug she requested just moments earlier) that casts
uncertainty onto whether and how the message was meant (1972: 217).
Bateson wrote elsewhere and often of the *pain* (and even of the
"extreme pain") that can be inflicted on humans (and on dogs, and on
dolphins) through exposing them to such paradoxes (e.g. 1972: 241-2,
246, 278, 478, 1979: 118-123). For him, withdrawal from linguistic and
bodily communication (catatonia), flight into distrustful, delusional
interpretation (paranoia), or into disorganized thought and discourse
crammed with unlabeled metaphors (hebephrenia, "word salad") were not
adequately described as symptoms of a mental disorder ascribable to (or
locatable in) a bounded self. Rather, they were adaptive dispositions,
acquired or learned in a dynamic dialog with a larger life environment,
and "in some sense appropriate" (1972: 206) to dampen the repeated
experience of the pain generated by paradoxes of abstraction. Those
dispositions or "unconventional communicative habits" were particularly
prone to develop when a young human grew up within an early
communication system (typically, amongst close kin) in which routine
contradictions or lack of clarity in the labeling of exchanged messages
made it extraordinarily difficult for her to know what sort of message
was being communicated --- while, at the same time, *any* interpretation
exposed her to rebuke or punishment for being unsound. The accumulated
effect of such "unresolvable sequences of experiences" (*ibid.*) could
be a breakdown, rather than development, of the child's communicative
system, a learned incapacity to discriminate "what sort of message a
message is" (including for interpreting the messages internal to her own
thought and emotional processes), and withdrawal or flight into one form
or the other of psychic seclusion. One may well remember here Arendt's
formulation of worldliness as a material-semiotic horizon ahead of us,
for example, her claim that "*with word and deed we insert ourselves
into the human world*, and this insertion is like a second birth, in
which we confirm and take upon ourselves the naked fact of our original
physical appearance" (1958). While Bateson himself does not use this
language, the victim of the double bind was, perhaps, forced or kept in
his analysis into a form of worldlessness.

Arendt, Hannah. 1958. *The Human Condition*. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Bateson, Gregory. 1972. *Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays
in Anthropology, Psychiatry, Evolution, and Epistemology*. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

---------. 1979. *Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity*. New York: E.P.
Dutton.

Bateson, Gregory, Don D. Jackson, Jay Haley, and John H. Weakland. 1972.
"Toward a Theory of Schizophrenia." In *Steps to an Ecology of Mind:
Collected Essays in Anthropology, Psychiatry, Evolution, and
Epistemology*, 201--27. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Chaney, Anthony. 2017. *Runaway: Gregory Bateson, the Double Bind, and
the Rise of Ecological Consciousness*. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press.
